=== PAGE 4 ===
rp(~x) = f (y = k|x)− f (y = k|~x) (2)
r(x, p) = 1
| ~Xp|
∑
~x∈ ~Xp
rp(~x) (3)
where rp(~x) is effect of an individual perturba-
tion, ~Xp = {~x1, .., ~xt} is the set of t transformed
signals along p, and r(x, p) is the final relevance.
The number t depends on the considered feature
(see §3).
Each r(x, p) is bound between−1 and 1. High
absolute values indicate that the model is sensitive
to perturbations of the considered feature. In con-
trast, near-zero values indicate that it is otherwise
robust. Moreover, positive values indicate that, on
average, the perturbations reduce the prediction
probability for the given class; negative ones indi-
cate that perturbations increase it.
3 Experimental Setup
Datasets and Tasks. We evaluate our method on
three datasets and two tasks: FLUENT SPEECH
COMMANDS (FSC; Lugosch et al., 2019) and
the Italian Intent Classification Dataset (ITALIC;
Koudounas et al., 2023a) for the Intent Classifica-
tion (IC) task, and IEMOCAP (Busso et al., 2008)
for Emotion Recognition (ER).
FSC is a widely used benchmark dataset for the
IC task. The dataset contains recordings of inter-
actions with home voice assistants. The goal is
to predict an intent as the combination of three
independent predictions, i.e., an action (e.g., “in-
crease”), an object (e.g., “heat”), and a location
(e.g., “bedroom”). We focus on the test set, which
comprises 3793 audio samples.
ITALIC is an IC dataset for the Italian language,
including 60 unique intents. The test set consists
of 1441 samples. We use the “Speaker” setup,
wherein each speaker utterances belong to a single
set among the train, validation, and test.
IEMOCAP is a dataset for the ER task anno-
tated with emotion labels (i.e., happiness, anger,
sadness, frustration, and a neutral state). It consists
of recorded interactions between pairs of actors
engaged in scripted scenarios involving ten unique
actors. Among its five sessions, we consider Ses-
sion ‘1’, consisting of 942 utterances.
Models. We consider the monolingual English
wav2vec 2.0 base (Baevski et al., 2020) for FSC
and IEMOCAP . We use pre-existing fine-tuned
checkpoints on the two datasets (Yang et al., 2021a).
We use the multilingual XLS-R (Babu et al., 2022)
and its fine-tuned checkpoints (Koudounas et al.,
2023a) for ITALIC.
Word-level Audio Alignment and Transcription.
We use WhisperX (Bain et al., 2023), a state-of-
the-art multi-lingual word-level alignment and tran-
scription model, to transcribe dataset audios and
obtain word-level timestamps.
We use the gold transcriptions of the datasets
to compute the word error rate (WER). WhisperX,
based on Whisper (Radford et al., 2023) for gen-
erating transcriptions, achieves a WER of 1.72 on
FSC, 15.77 on IEMOCAP, and 7.49 on ITALIC.
Paralinguistic Features. We consider pitch shift-
ing, time stretching, background white noise injec-
tion, and reverberation. We provide further details
on the transformations in Appendix B.2 and in our
repository.
Explanation Setup. For each sample of the set,
we explain the probability that the model assigns to
the predicted label. Explaining the predicted class
provides insights into how the model produced its
prediction.
4 Results
4.1 Qualitative Evaluation
We conducted a qualitative manual evaluation. We
observe local (instance-level) and global explana-
tions (Doshi-Velez and Kim, 2017). Instance-level
explanations provide insights into which features
influence the model to classify a specific instance.
Local explanations address questions such as: Is it
correct for the right reasons? Or: Was the predic-
tion robust to a specific input perturbation? Global
explanations provide an aggregate view to grasp
high-level model characteristics.
Individual level. We show the capabilities of our
method by explaining wav2vec 2.0 on a FSC sam-
ple. We refer the reader to Appendix C for more ex-
amples. For a specific utterance with transcription
“Turn up the bedroom heat,” the model correctly
predicts increase as the action, heat as the object,
and bedroom as the location, fully identifying the
intent.
Table 1 shows the word-level audio segment ex-
planation for this utterance computed for the pre-
dicted class for each intent slot.6 The explanation
6For convenience, the Table’s header reports the tran-
scribed words. However, we would like to remark that our
2224
=== PAGE 5 ===
Turn up the bedroom heat.
act=increase 0.250 0.545 0.260 0.139 0.021
obj=heat 0 0 0 0.014 0.550
loc=bedroom 0.002 0.006 0.087 0.997 0.323
Table 1: Example of word-level audio segment explana-
tion; FSC dataset. The higher the value (and darker the
color), the more the audio segment is relevant for the
prediction.
speed pitch
up down down up reverb noise
act=increase 0.19 0.04 0.04 0.13 0.56 0.44
obj=heat 0 0 0 0.04 0 0.29
loc=bedroom 0.03 0.01 0.13 0.33 0.36 0.60
Table 2: Example of paralinguistic attribution r(x, p)
for p := time stretching (speed variation), pitch shifting,
and noise injection; FSC dataset, instance in Table 1.
The higher the value (and darker the color), the more
the model is sensitive to perturbing the feature.
reveals that the segment relative to the word ‘up’ is
the most relevant term for the action increase. The
words “heat” and “ bedroom” increase the prob-
ability of the predictions heat and bedroom, re-
spectively. Such explanations are reasonable and
aligned with our expectations. We expand on ex-
planation plausibility by conducting a user study
with human subjects in §5.
Table 2 shows the paralinguistic explanation. In-
creasing the speed of the signal has a moderate
effect on the prediction “action=increase” but none
on the others. 7 Increasing the pitch impacts the
prediction of the location and also of the action.
Lowering the pitch affects the location slot. The
reverberation impacts the prediction for the action
slot and slightly for the location; on the other hand,
the object prediction is not affected. The prediction
for this instance is affected by the introduction of
noise, specifically for the location and the action.
To get a finer-grained view on the effect of par-
alinguistic perturbation, we inspect r( ~xi),∀ ~xi∈
~Xp, for differentp, using heatmaps. Figure 3 shows
r(~x) when stretching the audio (i.e., increasing and
decreasing speed), shifting the pitch, and injecting
noise. The model’s prediction are always robust to
time stretching but one case. Halving the duration
approach works end-to-end at the audio level, and importance
scores relate to audio segments.
7Editing paralinguistic features has no symmetrical effects.
E.g., increasing noise for a highly-noisy signal will not likely
change the prediction. We expect a similar effect on prosody.
Tuning the pitch up or down will contribute differently based
on the original pitch of the signal.
0.55
faster
0.7 0.85 x 1.15 1.3 1.45
slowerstretching factor
increase
heat
bedroom
time stretching
-5.0
lower
-3.0 -1.0 x 1.0 3.0 5.0
highersemitones
increase
heat
bedroom
pitch shifting
x 10.0 4.0 1.0
noisersignal-to-noise ratio (dB)
increase
heat
bedroom
noise
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Figure 3: rp(~x) breakdown for p := time stretching,
pitch shifting, and noise injection. x indicates the
original signal. A darker red (green) color indicates
a stronger drop (increase) in probability.
of the signal (i.e., making it twice as fast) makes
the prediction “action=increase” drop severely. We
hypothesize this effect is due to the fact that the
leading phrase “Turn on” becomes hardly intelligi-
ble.
Similarly, the model is generally robust to pitch
shifting. We see the prediction change only in ex-
treme cases when the pitch is tuned up or down
by three or more semitones. These cases are “lo-
cation=bedroom” (pitch up and down) and “ac-
tion=increase” (pitch up). Finally, the model is af-
fected starting when the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR)
reaches 10 dB. Interestingly, the effect varies across
slots. The “location” prediction drops first, fol-
lowed by “action” and “object” whose prediction
changes after SNR is as low as 1 dB.
Tables and heatmaps provide two complemen-
tary tools for the intepretability of SLU mod-
els. The former is helpful for a first, high-level
glance to understand whether specific tokens or
non-linguistic features have driven the model out-
put. Heatmaps uncover where and to which extent a
model is sensitive to input perturbation. Moreover,
note that our framework can easily be extended
to other forms of p. We will provide easy-to-use
Python implementations to facilitate and enrich
such multi-faceted analysis.
Global level. We aggregate the importance
scores of word audio segments or paralinguistic
levels across the entire dataset to investigate the
global influence of each component.
2225
=== PAGE 6 ===
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5
softer
quieter
sock
more
less
up
louder
off
cooler
resume
increase
quiet
newspaper
stop
pause
Label: action
activate
deactivate
increase
decrease
bring
change language
Figure 4: Top 15 most influential words, separately for
each predicted class. FSC dataset, Slot: Action.
speed pitch
up down down up reverb noise
action 0.13 0.09 0.12 0.07 0.27 0.37
object 0.07 0.05 0.07 0.04 0.17 0.43
location 0.06 0.04 0.06 0.04 0.11 0.21
Table 3: Averager(x, p) for p := time stretching (speed
variation), pitch shifting, and noise injection; FSC
dataset. The higher the score (and darker the color),
the more the model is sensitive to perturbing the feature.
Figure 4 shows a summary plot for the word-
level audio segment explanations of wav2vec 2.0
predictions on the FSC test set for the slot “action.”
We first compute the explanations for the predicted
classes. Then, we aggregate audio segments corre-
sponding to the same transcripted word after basic
processing (i.e., lowercase, punctuation removal,
noun singularization). We report the top 15 seg-
ments, occurring at least 5 times in the dataset,
with the highest average importance. The average
importance scores are represented separately for
each class. Hence, the summary plot shows which
spoken words are associated with which predicted
class(es). From Figure 4, the importance score for
spoken words such as ‘ newspaper’ and ‘ cooler’
across the entire test set is associated with a single
class value. Each class ( ‘ bring’ and ‘decrease’)
corresponds to a plausible value. When a term is as-
sociated with multiple labels, the summary plot can
become a debugging tool. For instance, the spoken
word ‘pause’ is correctly linked to the predicted
action ‘deactivate’ but erroneously connected to
‘decrease.’
Table 3 shows the average importance score of
paralinguistic explanations aggregated for each la-
bel. We observe higher average importance scores
for the action label for the time stretching compo-
nent, specifically when compressing the utterance
duration (‘stretch down’). The pitch transforma-
tions induce a higher change in the prediction prob-
ability for the action slot, especially when lowering
the pitch. Finally, adding background noise glob-
ally impacts the model prediction.
We further investigate the complementary points
of view of word-level and paralinguistic attribu-
tions in Appendix C.
4.2 Quantitative Faithfulness Evaluation
A significant research effort has been devoted to the
evaluation of post-hoc explainability (Atanasova
et al., 2020; Agarwal et al., 2022; DeYoung et al.,
2020). Faithfulness and plausibility have been
conceptualized as two crucial desiderata to make
explanations meaningful and trustworthy (Jacovi
and Goldberg, 2020). Faithfulness measures eval-
uate how accurately the explanation reflects the
model’s inner workings, whereas plausibility mea-
sures whether it matches human expectations.
We quantitatively evaluate the faithfulness of
our word-level audio segment explanations in this
section and discuss a user study for plausibility in
§5. Our focus on word-level explanations is driven
by token-level explainability. Building upon prior
works on text-based explanations (DeYoung et al.,
2020; Jacovi and Goldberg, 2020), we extend and
adapt existing evaluation metrics to the specific
context of audio segment explanations.
Metrics. We generalize comprehensiveness and
sufficiency (DeYoung et al., 2020), two widely
adopted faithfulness measures. These metrics were
originally designed for token-level explanations in
text classification, where explainers assign a rele-
vance score to each token. Being in a similar setup,
we use audio segments rather than tokens, leaving
the metric unchanged.
Comprehensiveness evaluates whether the ex-
planation identifies the audio segments the model
“truly relied upon” to make the prediction. We
measure it by progressively masking the audio seg-
ments highlighted by the explanation, observing
the change in probability, and finally averaging
the results. A high value of comprehensiveness
indicates that the audio segments highlighted by
the explanations are relevant to the prediction (see
DeYoung et al. (2020) for more details).
Sufficiency evaluates if the audio segments in the
explanation are sufficient for the model to make the
prediction. Differently from comprehensiveness,
we preserve only the relevant audio segments and
compute the prediction difference. A low score in-
2226
=== PAGE 7 ===
FSC ITALIC IEMOCAP
Method action object location intent emotion
WA-L1O 0.623 0.627 0.467 0.693 0.507
WA-LIME 0.638 0.663 0.481 0.723 0.484
random 0.299±0.002 0.251±0.005 0.192±0.005 0.325±0.005 0.274±0.005
WA-L1O 0.161 0.086 0.063 0.158 0.310
WA-LIME 0.165 0.077 0.054 0.139 0.264
random 0.483±0.004 0.447±0.007 0.338±0.002 0.558±0.002 0.454±0.004
Table 4: Comprehensiveness (↑, top) and Sufficiency (↓, bottom) scores for our word attribution explanation via
leave-one-out (WA-L1O ), our word-level LIME (WA-LIME ), and random attribution for the FSC, ITALIC , and
IEMOCAP datasets, separately for each label. Best result in bold.
dicates that the audio segments in the explanations
indeed drive the prediction.
Baseline. We assess the quality of explanations
compared to a random explainer. The random ex-
plainer assigns a random score in the range [-1, 1]
to each word audio level segment.
Results. Table 4 shows the comprehensiveness
and sufficiency results for the FSC , ITALIC , and
IEMOCAP datasets, separately for each label. We
generated our word-level audio segment explana-
tions with respect to the predicted class. We report
our results for both the leave one out (WA-L1O )
and the LIME-based ( WA-LIME ) methods. For
the random baseline, we consider five rounds of
generations, and we report average and standard
deviation. The results in Table 4 show that our
word-level explanations outperform the random
baseline for both metrics. Moreover, WA-LIME
explanations are generally more faithful.
5 Plausibility User Study
Plausibility to humans is another essential desider-
atum of good explanations. It measures whether
explanations are reasonable, believable, and, more
generally, align with human reasoning (DeYoung
et al., 2020; Jacovi and Goldberg, 2020).
We conducted a user study to assess whether
our approach produced plausible explanations. We
focused on word-level audio segment attribution
in the Intent Detection task in English and Italian.
The target of our study was practitioners knowl-
edgeable in machine learning. See Appendix D for
full details.
5.1 Study Design
Quality Control. To help participants familiarize
themselves with the task and to check if our def-
inition of plausibility applies, we provided some
initial questions as sanity checks and quality con-
trol. In practice, we asked participants to compare
our explanations with a baseline method that as-
signs random scores to every word and to express
a preference.8 This task tests if the study questions
are well-framed and our explanations are informa-
tive (at least over random attribution).
Plausibility Assessment. To understand the per-
ceived plausibility of explanations, we asked par-
ticipants to rate the plausibility of the explanations
in absolute terms on a 4-point Likert-like scale.
Visualization Strategy. Recent evidence shows
that different visualization strategies impact cog-
nitive load, efficiency, and efficacy (Schuff et al.,
2022). Our color-coded score approach (see Ta-
ble 1) combines a word-level saliency map with
the precise indication of the score overlaid onto it.
However, we are interested in finding out if better
options exist. We asked participants to compare our
solution against plain word saliency maps (Arras
et al., 2017; Arora et al., 2022), and bar charts for
ease-of use and scalability to many examples.
5.2 Findings
Our study involved 35 participants recruited from
university courses and research laboratories close
to our institutions. We report here the main findings.
Please refer to Appendix D for full results.
The quality control checks confirmed that our
approach can provide plausible insights. In the
head-to-head comparison, all participants preferred
our explanation over the random one for both FSC
(IC, English) and ITALIC (IC, Italian) across all
8We verified that all study recordings were intelligible.
There is at least one Italian native speaker and a B2-level
English speaker among the authors.
2227
